
SHOW NOTES

TOP TEN TIPS WHEN TALKING WITH AN ATTORNEY ON THE OTHER SIDE OF A COLLECTION LAWSUIT (GENERALLY, DON’T DO IT UNLESS YOU HAVE TO)
Its All About Protecting the Attorney’s Ass
The Attorney is the ultimate PC’er. 
Long before PC or Wokeness fell into the general consciousness, attorneys were PCing all over the place. 
Attorneys are built in purveyors of CYA-Covering Your Ass. Ass should stand for authority. They don’t make a move (by the Code of Professional Responsibility) or by CYA is something goes wrong.  

They will seek consent on everything.  You will hear that they can’t promise anything without seeking client approval while at the same time insisting you give them something “to take back to my client.” Think salesman taking your offer back to the General Manager when buying a car. Same ethics generally. But, again, the attorney is always thinking CYA.

Talking to the Man. Remember, you are talking to the Plaintiff’s Agent. So, generally, you are talking with the Actual Company you are suing or being sued by.

Smooth Ride. In my experience, the collection law firm’s total focus is getting the Debtor Defendant into Default status and will delay working with you to stretch out the time limit from the service of the lawsuit to default status, so they don’t have to deal with the case or your defense.  Remember 9/10. There’s a law firm here whose phone system does not work and good luck getting them to take messages and return your call.

Never, ever, admit you owe the debt on the phone. EVERY CALL IS RECORDED. You must act as though it is recorded.  Collection Attorneys operate in data files for reminders as they have too many cases. If the Attorney involved sees that you admitted owing the debt but had an excuse for not paying or you admit ANYTHING, you will see this held against you, again and again. 

Don’t offer anything by way of an excuse.  See Number 4. Collection Lawsuits are generally crap because there is no reason to do a good job (in the collection attorney’s eyes because: all debtors are bad and they owe the debt and (2), they file thousands of lawsuits based upon general pleadings to avoid putting any more work into an already shrinking margin.

Any excuse, defense, or anything showing how the attorney or plaintiff will lose the case just gives them a heads up how to win against you and allows them to amend the lawsuit against you to solidify their case.

Treat like a Criminal Case:  Don’t confess anything without an attorney or if you plan on doing the case yourself, SHUT THE HELL UP prior to filing your response. 

Attorneys justify… their clients lose. Attorneys work the case differently than what the client’s goals are. The attorney’s goal is not to lose the client and the continued fees of a case or look weak. In Creditor cases, the attorneys face client backlash from tough mandates from their clients. JPM. They are playing and running scared all the time that the firm will lose a creditor account. Do something out of the norm and the attorney will do his best to get rid of you.

But with debt buyers cases, the client only wants to sue you and win the case or settle it for a debt they paid pennies on the dollar for.  They trust the attorney on the, a lot of time to their detriment. So, you can use this against the attorney to provide them proof that:
You can win this.
You are going to be a problem for a relatively small amount of money so the attorney sees a lot of work for nothing and the “spanner in the works.”
Make it so the attorney fears you and will work on your behalf to save his ass first (fears losing to an unrepresented debtor).
The Attorney’s goal is always primary. Sad but true. Any threat to the attorney that makes her look bad to their boss or their client will help you get this resolved in your favor. Comment on the pleadings and they look bad and don’t prove anything. Just don’t say why, yet.
Remember, the attorney’s ultimate goal is protecting the gravy train, next client’s goals, delay so you default, getting the case concluded with the less amount of work-every time the client is involved, requires more work and something generally, most collection attorneys don’t want to do.
Don’t agree to anything. Let your pleadings do the talking. Take notes on your end. They are.
Remember, the attorney always has more room to settle the debt and don’t accept the first couple of offers. See again, car dealerships.

BONUS ROUND CODE FOR:

I have to take this back to my client. Client does have to be consulted or the Attorney is delaying to get the 21 days over. Assume the worst, Always. 

“But it is your debt, right? This will help move this along quicker.” They are trying to get you to admit something they can use against you and will find a way to tell the court when they inevitably file a hostile Motion to Dismiss. 

Always Ask if the attorney can speak for the Plaintiff suing you? A question like that bothers the attorney who wants to have the ultimate protection of “ I have to go back to my client” while also maintain a superior position in the dealings with you. 
Argue with the attorney over authority, right to settle, anything that causes a problem in the attorney’s mind.

Remember, any settlement discussion is not allowed to prove liability. So, that helps both sides. You should always say to the attorney, I am contacting you with settlement discussions if you are going to offer anything. While it is not legally held against you, the attorney for the Plaintiff will have this in the brain in suing and working the case against you if you are already trying to settle the case. They will then lock into the fact you owe the debt. They don’t like to work.

So, balance your need to resolve the debt collection lawsuit with the damage it can cause you if they don’t accept the offer. 

Best tip: File your Answer and Affirmative Defenses but for entering settlement discussions with the other side’s attorney. You are protected almost 100% from having any offer held against you for liability. 

Recognize that filing an Answer improves and lowers the offer they will accept from you. They don’t want to do the work (once you file the Answer, now the attorney has to start making court appearances and is getting less money on a settlement).

